i was buried before i even went to
prison
i was buried then because the the the
level of corruption
uh that had engulfed me as a young man
alone
um you know the the book was written
before the indictment came down and and
that was really my reality my reality
was
that i was going to prison for the rest
of my life and there was nothing
no one was going to be able to do about
[Music]
it
hey everyone this episode is brought to
you by our sponsor betterhelp
an online counseling company with the
mission to make professional counseling
accessible affordable and convenient i
hope you enjoy
hey everybody welcome to another episode
of impact theory i'm here with somebody
today that is going to
blow your mind i cannot overhype this
one enough
buckle in we are here with somebody who
has lived a life that you really can't
imagine
isaac wright jr isaac thank you so much
for joining me man
thank you tom thank you for having me
dude seriously i
i could not be more just absolutely
mentally mauled by your story
and it isn't even so much what you've
been through which will lay out for
people
quickly here at the top it's how you
approach problems
so let's really fast you were wrongly
convicted of a crime in the early 90s
given a life sentence plus like an extra
70 years so you're
never getting out of jail and i want you
to pick up with
um who represented you in court
i represented myself and and you know
not not because it was something that
i wanted to do i literally tried to find
an attorney that was going to do right
by me but
you know attorney after attorney uh was
coming in
and was just telling me that my best
alternative was to plead guilty
you know and take 20 years for something
i didn't do and so
my only course uh was to represent
myself really fast
would some of those people if you had
pushed and said look i get that that's
your advice and you think that i'm going
to lose
but will you not stand and represent me
if you had said that would they have
agreed or you just knew their their
hearts not going to be in it they're not
going to do what it takes oh
they were going to represent me and i
was going to go to prison without a
voice
and and that was that was the issue was
not
um the lack of representation i would
have gotten representation
but i would have gotten the kind of
representation that would have sent me
to prison for the rest of my life
with no way out uh because
at that point i was going to be a slave
to somebody else's strategy somebody
else's thought process
and uh someone else's motives you know
that passion and that drive and that
belief
for example i mean this is very very
simple if you don't believe in something
you're never going to be able to
convince anybody else of it and so that
was really
uh where i found myself i found myself
uh in a position where nobody believed
in me
i was the only one that believed in me
dude it's
so how old are you at this point i'm in
my 20s
and what's your educational background a
high school diploma
so here's a guy in his 20s with nothing
but a high school diploma
who decides that okay i've looked at my
options
from a representation standpoint and i
am better off
representing myself even though i don't
know the legal system that already so
one because i know how your story turns
out um i know that it's brilliant
in the moment though i would have
thought i i would have wept at your feet
and begged you
to take an attorney and so what
what was it in your mind that were you
thinking
i can learn this fast enough or
or do you have to explain to us this
idea of having a voice was more
important than winning
having a voice was more important than
winning uh and that that's how it
initially began
but what happened is when i picked up
that first law book
it felt like i was doing it all the time
there was an epiphany and
and there was a there was a sense that i
found myself
i'm facing life in prison i came into
the arrest and and the charges and the
indictment
and all these problems thinking that i
actually had it down that i was on top
of the world
um you know because i had a flourishing
career and my
ex-wife at the time her career was
flourishing so we were doing really well
and you know as a 20-something year old
young man
you know with the little uh little baby
girl a family i thought i just i thought
i made all the right decisions i had to
prom the world in the palm of my hand
and i didn't realize until i went to
jail
that you know i actually found myself i
mean that's where i found out who i
really was
when i picked up that law book for the
first time and and
from that point my strategy began to
change
on how i was going to move through the
system
all right so i think one of the um just
to throw out some more
of the the pieces of the story so we can
get to the really interesting
stuff uh corrupt judge ends up going to
jail
corrupt uh litigator who ends up
committing suicide
like these it wasn't like uh
this was just you were being over
sentenced or something like that like
you were in the middle of like one of
the most insane and
corrupt um arrests and prosecutions
i was ever immediately surrounded
completely engulfed in corruption
and at every i was i was when you when
you look at it i was
buried before i even went to prison
i was buried then because the the the
level of corruption
uh that had engulfed me as a young man
alone
um you know the the book was written
before the indictment came down and and
that was really my reality my reality
was
that i was going to prison for the rest
of my life and there was nothing
no one was going to be able to do about
it that was my reality the story that i
would love for you to tell that will
give people an understanding so here we
have a young guy in his 20s who's
thriving by the way he's got his own
private record label uh his wife is one
of his
musicians and is selling millions of
albums like you're really doing
very well capitalizing on the the rise
of hip-hop like
you're really killing it but only have a
high school diploma
get framed railroaded in the extreme
and now take us to that moment where
you're being sentenced and sort of how
this like epic
battle that that was destined to be on
tv plays out between you and the lead
prosecutor
so you know i
obviously i i get convicted i go to
trial and you know the trial is um
it's about a month and a half almost two
months and uh
the jury goes the jury's out for a week
or so and there's problems with the
jurors and the judge tells them
don't you know get go back in and don't
come out to you and find him guilty and
so they
they find me he actually said that yeah
yeah he said he told him to go back
that's and that's that's public record i
think there's some
there's some articles online about that
but he he literally told him to go back
in and not to come back out till he
found because i had a problem
you know this wasn't just a fight this
was a fight to the death and i i did
everything that i possibly can even
though my strategy was not to get a
an acquittal you know i gave them my
best
that i had and you know they deliberated
for a week they came out and said you
know we can't find him guilty
and that's what he did he sent them back
in and they came back with the guilty
verdict
um about about 45 days later i'm
sentenced
and so you know i'm standing up at
during my sentencing i'm
you know i'm looking looking at the
judge and as the judge
is is handing down my sentence i notice
that the prosecutor moves from his table
so i i kind of turn to look to see
what's going on
and he's continuing to walk up towards
the judge's bench and now the judge is
actually
sentencing me and and so that was really
weird for me because i've never seen
anyone
uh at least a litigator an officer of
the court
moving around in the court going up
through the gallery into the in front of
the judge and actually in front of his
bench while he's
he's talking it was a little
disrespectful so i
you know it caught my attention so i'm
looking at him and my head
in my eyes is following him up to the
front
and he stands right in front of the
judge right in front of the judge's
bench where you can hardly
the bench is a little higher so i can
he's covering the judge
up to like his his because he you know
he's a tall guy but the judge was hiring
him so i was able to still see the
judge's face so
he turns and he turns around when he
gets to the judge's bench
he turns his back to the judge so that
he can you know he can look at me
and he timed it he timed walking up to
that bench in such a way
as he was able to get there and turn
around and look at me
as the judge was handing down the life
sentence
and when the judge gave me the life
sentence he started smiling at me
he wanted he wanted me to see he it was
important for him
uh for me to see that not only
did he defeat me but he took
pleasure in what he had done to me and
so
i looked back at him you know i looked
back at him and
i smiled back at him and so we stood
there i i couldn't i didn't even hear
what was going on anymore i mean after
the last sentence it was all a buzz
anyway
you know and so we stood there smiling
at each other throughout the entire
proceeding until the judge finished
sentencing me
and then he walked off and walked to his
table and shook hands and everything and
patted everybody on the back and all of
that
and then i was handcuffed and escorted
out
why smile i knew why he was smiling
i smiled at him because i knew he didn't
understand
what really was happening you know i
never i never
decided to represent myself to escape
being sentenced to life in prison
i decided to represent myself because
when i realized that i had a gift
that i knew nothing about my strategy
shifted
to not
going to prison because i was going my
strategy shifted to making sure that
when i went to prison
they wasn't going to be able to keep me
and so everything i did was not for the
day everything that i did
was for years down the line you know
even some of the things that you're
probably going to ask me about when i
made new law while i was in prison
you know i sat and waited for the right
person for three years in prison i
waited for three years to get that right
person
to put this argument in and i did it and
i got him reversal i use that case
in my favor after i made the newsletter
right that that movement was so
brilliant you have to explain to people
why you didn't just use it immediately
in your own case
and like what it means to create new
case law i i understood
early on the corruption that i was
facing even before i picked up that law
book there was an incident that happened
to me
the day i was arrested and they took me
to
a holding cell in a jail to be processed
before being transported to the county
jail
uh the day i was arrested i was in the
cell and
and i kind of fell asleep it might have
been three o'clock in the morning i kind
of dozed off
you know because i was arrested at in
the afternoon that day
and i'm still just sitting there in the
jail and it's
two three o'clock in the morning and you
know i happen to i think i dozed off
because i heard my name in it you know i
came to
and when i heard my name i looked up i
saw one of the detectives and a man in a
suit
coming towards me in the cell so in my
head it was like okay a family member or
a friend
contacted an attorney and he's here to
see me
so i got up and i approached the bars
and as i approached the bars the guy in
the suit
put his hands through the bars and i
started shaking his hands and the in the
the the detective that was escorting him
and says i just wanted to introduce you
to uh somerset county prosecutor
nicholas l bissell
and and as he was talking nick bissell
says to me
uh i wanted you to know mr wright that
i'm here to let to to inform you that
i'm going to be
trying your case personally now he was a
head prosecutor
head prosecutors don't try cases head
prosecutors are administrators
their assistants try cases
he gets out of his bed two three o'clock
in the morning to come tell me that
so even as a kid 20 something years old
i understood that that move
was something that was going to manifest
himself
itself in fact somewhere down the line
because he was not going
to turn against what he just said and he
was not going to allow me to make him
look like a fool
so i knew by any means necessary i was
going to prison
it was over at that point fast forward
and i've been convicted i've been
i've been sentenced and
i'm moving toward i'm moving through the
system
one of the things that i knew from that
experience
is that the more i know about them and
the less they know about me
the better off i am for example if they
see me coming
they're gonna cut me off at the knees
and so the entire strategy that i used
was to formulate legal positions
and to formulate the direction that i
was going to go
into gathering evidence against him
without letting them
understand what i was actually doing i
did a civil case
and i fought that simple case like y'all
you guys did me wrong i'm suing you
but the purpose of the civil case was to
get evidence i didn't care
i could care less whether i won the
civil case or not
i could have cared less i knew that a
civil case
was um a door that opened you up to
a fishing expedition for evidence and a
criminal case was not
you know and so i was fighting two wars
on both fronts
in order to stay ten steps ahead of them
without them seeing me coming
while they concentrated on keeping me in
prison
i was gathering evidence against them
right up under their nose
and they had no clue what i was doing
dude it's so smart and you know i always
tell people to play the long game and
normally when i say that i'm talking
about
reputation and you know be a good person
and just think how these things knock on
but the thing that makes you so
interesting to me the reason you've
completely captured my imagination
is that when you understand how the
world works
the system works the game works whatever
it is you're trying to play and you
don't
act as if the world works the way you
wish it does
right you act the way the world actually
works
and now when you do that you can
actually win because you're not fighting
yourself
right right and that you would go okay i
get the game
i'm playing i get that this is going to
be a slow burn you have the cajones to
rock seven and a half years in prison
you wait three years to
get the perfect case that matches yours
right so you go to jail for being a drug
kingpin
you see an opening to get that thrown
out
but first you need somebody else whose
case matches it so that you can
get case law so you give him i'm not
sure what exactly you had to give him
um but you give him something that he
uses in his case
right i give him a legal argument and so
so let me let me explain to you
i i lived my life uh as two people
uh moving through the system one person
um his his core motive was to wreak
havoc
through the judiciary and when you when
i talk about you know getting people
20 people out of prison when i talk
about while you were in prison yourself
while i was in prison myself my own life
i set my fight aside to ensure
uh that i got at least 20 people that
were wrongfully convicted or sentenced
out of prison uh during that time i also
litigated civil cases on behalf of the
prison for prison conditions mental
medical issues
you know a guy would would leave and go
to ed said he'd come back with broken
arms broken legs because
you know the guards beat him up and so
and so that one person was the person
you know fighting these these fights on
behalf of others um
and and and being effective that was a
person that was wreaking havoc
on the system that was my core motive
that individual
was to wreak havoc through justice
because one of the things about
injustice if you fight injustice with
justice
you wreak havoc upon injustice it's like
uh uh
water and oil it's never going to mix
you know and so
and so that's that was one of the things
that that person that was his that was
his core
existence in life the other person
was the person who had
an innate desire to write the wrong that
was done to him
and and that was an entirely different
fight
from the fight that i was fighting on
behalf of other prisoners because
when i fought on behalf of other
prisoners
i didn't have the worry about them
seeing me coming
but when i fought on my own behalf i had
the emotional baggage that i had to
manage
i had to be clandestine uh in the way i
was moving through the system and the
things that i
learned about the system and how i was
going to use those things
against them i had to be an entirely
different person
and so you had two distinct
personalities
uh that was moving through the system at
the same time in one person
and they cross collateralized those
experiences
to alter to bring in uh ultimate defeat
through specific strategies
that was laid out based on what that
what i had to work with
you know whatever it is that was in
front of me i i use it against him
talk to me about the emotional
management how did you recognize the
need for that
and then how did you actually pull it
off
um there was there was two things that i
dealt with
and and one uh i was in a good place
with it
because of something that happened to me
when i was a kid and that was fear
um something that happened to me when i
was a kid changed the way i dealt with
fear
and open to talking about what that is
yes um and that was extremely
significant because because fear is your
greatest enemy and when you're going
through what i went through
you know the average person i shouldn't
say the average person the greatest of
us
is engulfed in fear when they're facing
a live sentence or when they get a life
sentence and they go to a maximum
security prison
and there's dangers around them every
day 24 hours a day
but so when i was six years old there
was one day when my father was
was stationed in fort hamilton and this
was like on a saturday
and i had just collected enough bottles
uh because i
i did that at least once or twice a week
to have money over the weekends as a kid
i
picked the bottles up out of the ditches
and go knock on people's doors and
i collect bottles and i had collected
enough bottles that weekend
uh where i was i was able to buy you
know my myself some things from the
store and
and some of my brothers and so i was
really happy that day i was i was on my
way to the store
to spend some of that money that i made
collecting bottles
and i remember skipping down the
sidewalk going to the corner store and
as i was skipping down the sidewalk
there was a dog a german shepherd that
was
chained to a fence and i recognized the
dog because it belonged to
one of the guys in the neighborhood he
was older than me i think he was about
13 or 14 years old
his name was peanut and this dog was
just barking at me as i was skipping i
guess he thought i was running or
whatever but he was just barking barking
and i didn't pay no attention because
you know he was
tired of the fence so so i continued to
skip
and maybe 20 feet from the store
it got silent subconsciously
the dog wasn't barking anymore so
i noticed it as i was walking through
the store that the dog stopped barking
and and when i looked over
towards the dog he was straddling a car
he was up in the air he had straddled
the car jumped over it and he was coming
he was
getting on top of me so he knocked he
attacked me he knocked me to the ground
and as he knocked me to the ground he
was viciously pulling up and i was
screaming i mean i was i was horrified
and i was screaming help screaming and
as i was screaming
i was slinging my arms and by mistake
i hit him in the eye and he screamed
and when he screamed he backed up and
when he backed up the owner came peanut
came out of nowhere
mind you i think looking back as an
adult he was watching it
but when his dog got hurt when he saw
his dog get hurt
he jumped in and put his feet on the
chain and pulled the dog back
when i realized that i heard him
something happened inside of me
and it was like
you hurt this monster
as a kid and it was by mistake
but what if you would have fought back
what could have happened if you had just
fought back from the beginning
instead of screaming
and so as a six-year-old kid i
understood
the importance of failure fighting back
no matter how how much danger you're in
and so at that point i dealt with fear
differently the way i dealt with fear
uh was more compartmentalized and was
more controlled and so
and so the things that were that i could
perceive to be more dangerous to me
never ever again i looked at it as
something i couldn't defeat because i
hurt this dog
at six years old that had just attacked
me by the time i became an adult
i had mastered my ability to deal with
fear
and my ability to deal with with with
confrontation
and and issues that i you know uh
encountered
uh that were ultimately dangerous and
that allowed me to think clearly
in the midst uh of anarchy or in the
midst of caution i was
always able to think clearly
this issue with other emotions however
i was no different than the average
person
and and how you know you got pain that's
a that's another very very uh difficult
emotion to deal with
the emotion of pain and the emotion of
empathy when you seeing that
what you're going through is also
causing other people pain
you know and you see the world that you
built come crashing down around you
and you see all the people that you love
suffering
behind what you're going through uh and
so that was something that i never
had to deal with before in this way um
and so
one day now i'm in this prison cell
and these things are happening to me
and i'm writing this motion
i fall asleep riding the motion
i may have been asleep for an hour or
two and i get back up
i wake back up papers are on my chest
and everything in the cell
and i pick up where i left off
and as i pick up where i left off i'm
reading
what i had just wrote i'm reading it
and i set it down and start looking for
the emotions that i was writing
because i didn't even recognize it was
so emotional
it was so bogged down with emotional
baggage
even the way that i was articulating
myself it was hard for me to read
and so i knew that if i it was hard for
me to read
no one else was going to read it no one
was going to pay attention to it and i
wasn't getting anywhere with it and so
at that moment
i had to figure out a way to become
somebody else i i really i really became
a third person
that was a defining moment for me on
how i needed to to separate myself
from what i was going through in order
to stay focused and it took me some time
but i was able to master it i literally
became
a different person i was representing
myself
myself as someone else else and when i
when it became something that i
literally mastered
i was unstoppable the issue of my
ability to deal with fear different than
other people
and then now my ability to manage what i
was going through
i became a beast and you know at that
point
it just kept things kept just kept
falling in place
you know month after month year after
year
they continued to fall in place until
ultimately seven and a half year
years later i opened the door to my
freedom hey everybody it's time to talk
about all of our favorite subjects
mental health is there something holding
you back or preventing you from
achieving your goals or even just
interfering with your happiness
do any of you suffer from depression or
anxiety as a lot of you guys know i've
suffered from anxiety for
years and trying to tackle something
like that on your own
is not always the optimal strategy but
a lot of people are super nervous to try
out therapy or they don't really know
where to start or they're just plain
embarrassed but now there's a service
called better help that makes therapy
more accessible and affordable better
help is
professional counseling done securely
online
using your computer tablet or mobile
phone through video calls
phone calls or text messaging with
licensed therapists who are certified
by their state's board to provide
therapy and counseling
it is not self-help and it's not a
crisis line
it's an online service available
worldwide and it has a
massive network of counselors who have a
broad and diverse range of specialties
so you can get a counselor with a sort
of expertise that might not even be
available
in your local area betterhelp assesses
your needs and matches you with a
licensed professional therapist within
24 hours
you can log into your account anytime to
message your counselor
and betterhelp also has group in our
sessions
every week where members can learn in
groups directly from licensed counselors
on multiple topics like relationships
and ways to overcome anxiety
especially if the thought of seeking
help makes you
nervous or embarrassed be sure to check
out the over 60
000 positive reviews posted on the
betterhelp site
and that's betterhelp h-e-l-p
betterhelp is committed to making it
easy for you to access the therapeutic
help you need
even if you have never gone to
counseling before it's
free to switch therapists it's more
affordable than local therapy
and they even have financial aid
available if you need it
betterhelp wants you to start living a
happier life
today visit betterhelp.com
impact and again that's spelled better
h-e-l-p and join over 500
000 people taking charge of their mental
health with the help
of an experienced professional better
help costs just 65
per week and financial aid is available
for those who qualify during the sign up
process
as an impact theory viewer you can get
10 percent off your first month
so visit betterhelp.com
impact and get the help you need today
all right guys
if you need this one please give it a
shot take care and be
legendary
man it's incredible i heard somebody
um in an interview once say you know
there was just something special
about mike tyson because there were a
lot of people that felt like they could
win
but mike felt like he couldn't lose and
that mentality that you just you know
talked about
like of being able to smile at the
corrupt by the way by this point you
know that you've been 100 railroaded
they've got people pretending to be your
employees that you've never met in your
life
and you know you've been railroaded
you're
you're facing down the system which i
can't think of anything more terrifying
as a human
it's just where do you push like what do
you do
and it just seems so impossible to
overcome that and for you in that moment
to smile
and i heard you once say he was smiling
because he was in the moment
i was smiling because i was in the
future and i knew
what he was going to have to deal with
in terms of my willingness to learn the
law to get good at it you know and to be
able to ultimately shut them down
and i want to remind everybody this ends
with the judge going to prison
and the prosecutor committing suicide
because he was facing 10 years in prison
for what he'd done to you and to other
people
it's like dude it is the craziest
victory ever of somebody who is just
like ultra methodical
now i wanted to walk everybody through
that story which you've told many times
before
but it's so important to understand
one thing which is once you understand
how the system works
and you don't give in to your emotion
i've heard you say you have to turn
anger into action so you
learn how the system works not wishing
it were a different way because that's a
waste of time
you learn it and then you turn your
your anger what could become bitterness
instead you make it usable
and then you go in like a
wrecking ball and you just
you know create the chaos in the system
it's
it's extraordinary now having said all
of that and setting people up
when this like clicked into a new gear
for me was when i realized you're
running for mayor of new york
yes now as soon as i heard you explain
why you think you should be mayor of new
york i was like this guy isn't doing
anything by accident
why are you running for mayor why do you
think you're the right person
to be the mayor of new york that's the
right question
well you know new york is in a
is in a in a state that it's never been
in in its history
um you know one of the one of the
the craziest things that i've ever seen
in my life was
driving into times square and it was
completely empty times square
out of every place else in the world
times square
had fallen asleep and you know new york
is the city that never sleeps but it was
sleeping
and it scared me because there were
certain things that i knew about new
york and one of the things that i knew
is that
you know the city of new york and its
mayor can't raise money
and what the deficit spiraling out of
control
hundreds of thousands of jobs lost i
knew
that the next mayor of new york city had
to be someone special
it had to be someone that not only
thought outside of the box
it had to be someone that could make the
impossible possible
because when you don't have money you
have no way to raise it you have to ask
the federal government
you have to ask the state or you have to
raise taxes which that tax base is not
there anymore
thousands of businesses has gone
hundreds of thousands of jobs lost
where's the money coming from uh and so
it it dawned on me that i was at a
moment in time in history
that i can trace my life back
to that arrest
the moment that those handcuffs was put
behind my back
and that day in times square
i saw that as a sequence of events
that led me down a road to this moment
in time
where i have was being prepared
to do that next incredible thing
for the betterment of mankind and
when you look at everything that has
happened to me when you look at my
delivery i mean
my delivery from prison was a divine
delivery it was divine my
god guided me through these issues and
these problems and he gave me a gift
in order to do that and so my decision
to run for mayor
was based on the same reasons why i
decided to represent myself
why i decided to help other people get
out of prison
why after i got out you know i spent the
next seven years pursuing a law degree
i was investigated after passing the bar
for nine more years and waited it out
those things did not happen to me for no
reason
they were preparing me for my next
biggest challenge
and and and i believe that next biggest
challenge is being the mayor of the
greatest city
uh in the world so that even if it's
four years
uh when new york gets back on his feet
and it will under my tutelage
um any mayor coming after me you know
will have us will have a small piece of
pie
to be able to deal with it when it comes
down to the problems in new york but
right now
it's an incredible problem of a cake uh
that any mayor coming in is going to
have trying to eat all the issues
and and dissolve it in ways world's
palatable
and so that the city can move forward
that's that's going to be an incredible
monster
for any person to come in as mayor and
slate and i think that i'm the one for
the job and i think i'm the only one
prepared for that
man i i will say this i admittedly do
not know
who the candidates are that are running
for new york but i will say this
the way your mind works is all about
problem solving
and so that's what gets me so excited
help people understand how is it that
you
think your way through novel problems
um it's that's a difficult thing to
explain because
it's a natural phenomenon and and
you're seeing things different than
other people so you have to
not only know that you're seeing things
different than other people you have to
know exactly what it is you're seeing
different
so that you can identify that for them
and they can understand where you're
coming from
uh so that's a complex thing to do but
but this is the way that i can say it
uh the way i deal with
with what i see um
i see everything in pieces i'm very very
detailed
uh in the way that i understand the
things that i'm
that i'm experiencing with all of my
senses
it doesn't matter whether a smell touch
hearing seeing
i i i i always take a granular approach
to the things that i'm experiencing in
life and the reason why i do that
explain this can you explain that with
the story of how you ended up getting
out of prison the final puzzle piece
because that to me is the most
chill-inducing
example of your ability to break things
up into small pieces
okay so um
so three years three and a half years
almost four years before
that incident happened i had won a
motion
the first that's ever happened it's
never happened again in the history of
american jewish prudence in the history
of american law
as a as a person serving life in prison
i want a motion that required
the state to transport me from a maximum
security prison
to the prosecutor's office
and he was never happened before this is
the first time something like this has
ever happened
right and and and he was forced to allow
me to look through his files
and i and this is this is extremely
important for you to understand what
this means
i am a prisoner i i went to i was
escorted
to the prosecutor's office and changed i
duct walked my way into the elevator
you know escorted by five or six cops in
in law enforcement officers
into the prosecutor's office when all
these boxes in a room
and i sat there all day looking through
this man's files
as a as a prisoner
while i'm looking through his files i
knew
that he was going to sanitize it in
other words i knew that he was going to
take out anything that i may need so in
my mind
i knew that i had to find something that
was insignificant
but i had to look at it in a way that i
know
they weren't going to look at it so that
i can use that insignificant piece that
insignificant piece of material
insignificant piece of paper
to entrap them in a way that was going
to be devastating to them so so let me
make that very much more simpler so i
found a piece of paper
it was an interoffice memo all it did
was direct police officers
to read the files in my case so that
they could prepare for trial that's all
it did it was one simple
paragraph nothing crazy and that's why
he left it in the file because it was
nothing important
there was four or five police officers
that signed it
so he left it in the files because it
was insignificant
they saw it as nothing as but an inner
office memo when i saw it
i saw that document as the document that
was going to get me out of prison
and and here's the reason why it was a
two to two full process and this is when
you
when you look at detail so i knew at
that time that
the detectives that was that was on that
memo that had signed it that had read
all the files in my case
and had signed it if i
asked them whether they read anybody
else's files i knew they were going to
lie your background i knew that they
weren't going to tell the truth
i knew it then when i the moment i saw
that paper i knew
i knew two things number one they
weren't gonna if i ever got a chance to
confront them
they wasn't gonna know that i had this
paper and number two if i ever
asked him them if they read the files
other files in the case they were going
to lie about it
so i knew that that paper
was a credibility weapon
i knew that so i went to the prosecutor
and asked him can you make a copy of
this so i could take it with me
he said yes he gave it to me he didn't
see anything wrong with it he gave me a
copy of it okay
i waited it took me
another week almost four years
for the opportunity to use that paper
four years right so now
remember what i said earlier i
understood
the significance of the paper from a
credibility standpoint
that these officers even though they
signed this document saying that they
read all the files in my case
if i asked them that i understand they
were going to lie and the reason why i
knew they were going to lie
about it is because they were going to
protect each other
if i asked you as a detective understand
whether you
whether you knew of
a discrepancy in another police
officer's report
the moment you tell me i didn't read
that other officer's report i can't ask
you about it anymore
in other words i can't attack his
credibility
through you so you're trained
that if you're asked about any other
report to deny ever reading it because
if you did
i could then ask you about it so that
was the atomic bomb for me
that one piece of paper because i had
the foresight to understand
that they were gonna lie here's the
problem here's a real challenge that i
faced
and this is this is the the the the
intricacies
of understanding human nature and the
way
they respond to difficulty
there's a difference between
challenging successfully a person's
credibility and getting them to confess
that's totally different so remember
what i just said
i knew that i had a credibility bomb
the challenge was okay you okay you
you know you challenged the police
officer's credibility and you did it
successfully but
you need a confession to get out of
prison because your appeals is over
you still got these 70 years you're
going to be retried on the life sentence
you know and that was an issue that i
talked about before about
um making new law in this other guy's
case and using it through mine out
so now that your appeals is over and you
got one chance at this guy
if he doesn't confess you're gonna spend
the rest of your life in prison
so i needed a police confession so this
is what i did
and this goes down to detail i took out
every law enforcement file in my case
laid it out of my cell and i did a
psychological profile through their own
reports
on each one of them and i chose one
person because once that paper was out
everybody was gonna know i had it i only
had one chance
to introduce it so i had to pick the
right
officer the right police the right
detective
that i believed if i got him in enough
trouble he was going to confess
so i did a psychological profile i
read the reports and the records
over and over countless times for
years and i picked one person that i
thought
this is the guy that's going to confess
so now
i have to make sure that he not only
his credibility is not only challenged
but he's confessed but he
it so seven and a half years later i'm
at this hearing
i'm at this hearing i'm calling
witnesses
and this is another thing you probably
already know at that hearing
before that hearing started
i was offered a deal mind you
i'm seven and a half years in prison i
got the 70 years that i'm doing
my life sentence was vacated because of
this new law i created
but the indictment wasn't dismissed i
was facing a retrial
on that so i'm facing a retrial on the
life sentence
and i'm still doing 70 years and at that
hearing
the prosecutor says listen we're going
to offer mister out of deal he can't
prove any of the things he's saying
it's all nonsense it never happened he's
lying johnny you've read it
it's crazy nothing like that and law
enforcement would do not none of the
things
ever that he's saying happen happen he's
just
he's just got an axe to grind and he's
making things up but here's what we're
going to do
we're going to offer mr wright a deal
so that he could be home in two years so
that he could start his life over again
get back and take care of his family and
be a productive member of society
if he doesn't take the deal we're taking
him back to trial in the life
and he's going to go back to prison with
lifeless 70 years
i turned it down okay i turned that deal
down
i would rather die in prison i would
rather have
died in prison i would rather have spent
the remainder of my life in prison
fighting to get out before i would give
them another
second of my life they stole it from me
they stole seven and a half years of my
life
and you know you got to think about what
that means because
the people on the outside needed me you
know my family
they needed me um and and i needed them
but the decision that i made was a
decision of universal sacrifice
and this is and this goes back to when
people choose their leaders
you know as mayors it goes back to that
if a person is not willing to make
sacrifices and to sacrifice his life
for the people he's he doesn't belong uh
to be the leader of the people and most
people don't have that quality but not
to veer off
um i turned the deal down and we had
this hearing
and during the course of the hearing the
judge is saying to me mr wright you
turned down an incredible deal you have
an uphill battle and
you know i i want to be honest with you
i don't see
where you're going with this i mean i
don't see you getting any lead weight
with the things that you've mentioned in
your papers
i said your honor you know i appreciate
i appreciate that but
but with the court's indulgence i'd like
to just i'd like to continue
you know uh with my hearings he says
well you have a right to do that go
ahead
so ultimately dugan came understanding
the officer's name was james
duggan right this is public record james
duggan
james dugan gets on the stand and here's
another detail this this is about
details so when he gets on the stand he
walks he's walking to the bench
i finally call him he's walking to the
witness stand
i noticed that his clothes his uniform
was different
and that bothered me i needed to
understand
why is your uniform why do i not
recognize your uniform i'm in prison
seven and a half years
i've been dealing with law enforcement
on a very very
intimate level in order to understand
the system in order to understand how
law enforcement works
in order to understand the culture of
law enforcement and i've never seen that
uniform you're worrying so that's
bothering me i need to understand it
the very first thing i did was ask him
about what he was wearing officer dugan
i noticed you're uh you're in uniform
today yes yes mr right
i've never seen that uniform before can
you explain to the court
what's your what's your job description
now what police uh department you work
for says mr wright i don't i don't work
for a police department
i am chief of the police academy
okay so seven and a half years later
this guy goes from a mere detective
in the prosecutor's office running the
entire police academy
well because i pay attention to detail
and ask that question that was a godsend
for me and here's the reason why
i know you're getting ready to lie to me
i know
i haven't asked you this question yet
but i know you're gonna lie so guess
what i'm gonna do to you
i'm gonna build you up
to make you look like an archangel
police
like god's own divine gatekeeper
i went through his entire career
and showed the court through him that he
was not only a man of honor
his integrity was impeccable he was a
a god-sent when it came down to police
work
and it showed in his rise in his career
and the moment i got him way up here
i got him so far that i couldn't even
reach
i asked him that question did you
remember
the discrepancy and detective racist
report
he said mr wright i didn't read
detective race's report
mind you now i got the document that
says he read every report
i don't stop there then i asked him
what about uh what about detective
buckman did you read his report
mr right out of it i went to three other
police officers and he just says
outright mr wright i didn't read
anyone's report out but my own
i write my report i read it i pass it on
to the sergeant
so i asked him three more times until i
get an objection
objection the judge screams on me mr
wright is accident answered it's clear
to this court
that this detective has read no other
report but his own
okay mind you i need a confession
i need a confession this is detail this
is this is not only understanding the
details
but knowing how to pick those details
apart in pieces
and use them just like an atom think
about this for a second the energy in an
atom
a single atom the things that we can't
see can wipe out the entire earth
the small details the power
and details the smallest ones
can wipe a man out so
when i got that objection and the court
said on the record that he didn't read
any others report
based on his testimony i pull out the
piece of paper
that i pulled out
that document do i present it to him no
i don't present it to him
i need a confession you know what i do
with it
i turn it around i put it behind my back
and i turn it around so anybody standing
beside this
behind me can read it
so it's like this what do i do then
i walk in front of the prosecutor's
table so he can read it
because i want him to know what i'm
getting ready to do
to his police officer witness understand
i need him to know first
and you can't do nothing about it you
sat in here all this time and you listen
to him live
now what i'm doing is i'm gonna show you
what i'm getting ready to do to him and
the reason why i'm showing you first
not only can you not do nothing about it
the sign language is gonna go back and
forth you know do all kinds of things
back and forth understand
you're gonna have to warn this man
you're gonna have to find a way to warn
him
what's getting ready to happen but what
you don't understand
is that in warning him the only thing
you're gonna do is put him on alert
and he's not gonna know why that's all
you're gonna do
that's exactly what i want you to do
because i need a confession i just don't
need
i'm starting with this confession with
you you're my tool you don't even know
that i'm using you
right so he's reading it
while he's reading it i got it behind my
back and i'm in front of him
he's sitting down reading it while he's
reading it
i'm asking the detective on the stand
more details and he's and the detective
is trying to look around me
at him
right so it's working everything is
falling in place so i stepped to the
side and i said excuse me detective do
you uh you need to speak to the
prosecutor
something that you uh you want to say i
you know i'm asking you questions but
you're looking at the at the prosecutor
you're okay yeah i'm okay that's okay i
just wanted to make sure because i see
you
uh looking at the prosecutor he's still
reading the paperwork
so now when i walk away from him
he asks me i walk far enough away that
he has to ask me out loud
can i have that for a second that's what
the prosecutor asked me i want him to
hear that's why i walked farther up the
way
so when he asked me can i have it i turn
around to him and i say
no just one word no and i walk further
away now
in the rules of court you have to let
your opponent see
what you're getting ready to show the
witness but i'm not showing him yet
so you're not seeing it when i said no
he does the next thing that i needed him
to do he objects
and acts to approach the bench now my
witness is seeing all of this
he's seeing this commotion going back
and forth he's seeing the eye and back
and forth so
he doesn't know what's going on but he's
witnessing there's a problem somewhere
he's playing in my hand so we go to the
bench
these are all details these are these
are utilizing
my new details as very very significant
weapons
without allowing your opponent to
understand
that you're actually doing that he has
no clue
that he's my weapon that this document
and him
is my weapon against the police
now the judge is going to be my next
weapon so he goes and he asks for a
sidebar the judge
and goes he calls the sidebar up we go
to the sidebar and he's telling the
judge judge
he's getting ready to show a privileged
document this is an inter-office memo
from the prosecutor's office
he can't show that witness that document
that document is confidential
so the judge says uh well mr wright yeah
what product in the prosecutor's office
you don't have any right to be showing a
witness to the document i said your
honor um
you're absolutely right um would you
like to see the document
he says yes so i give him the document
he's looking at it
he looks at me looks at the prosecutor
he says mr wright
how did you get this document because he
sees it's an inter-office memo
from the head prosecutor i'm serving a
life sentence in prison what the heck am
i doing
with a document an inner office member
from the prosecutor's office so he's the
judge the
first thing the judge actually says how
did you get this document
so i said your honor prosecutor this was
a different process this wasn't my head
prosecutor
he sent his his underling you know i was
a nobody
go to handle that he sent this underling
you know to handle the first assistant
which is really a second in command he
sent him to handle it
so i said your honor um mr bissell
gave it to me in civil discovery he
copied it and he gave it to me
so the judge looked at the prosecutor he
says
if your office gave him this document
it's no longer privileged
what are you talking about if it was
confidential and privileged you would
have never gave it to me he's got it
you gave it to him and there's nothing i
could do about it but your honor it's
still privileged we
what are you asking me to do prosecutors
this is what the judge says now
this is important because remember it
was a judge that put on the record the
questions been asked and answered
he read no other files it was the judge
that did that so the judge asks him
what is it that you're asking me to do
prosecutor
are you are you telling me that you want
me to prevent mr right
from questioning this officer on the
document and he said
over and over again that he's never read
any of the files in this case
is that what you're trying to get me to
do now because now you say what he's
asking him
are you trying to put my head on the
chopping block now
i've always got on record saying it's
been asked and answered and this man
didn't read any other reports so the
moment the prosecutor started to say
somebody says no
you know what sit down mr wright
go ahead and continue to question your
witnesses you can use the doc
so and i'm gonna make this quick i'm
gonna end it by doing this
i approach the witness with the document
and i gave it to him
and i asked him to read it to himself
and when i approached him and asked him
to read it to himself i'm standing
right next to him like over him i want i
want to crowd his space now while he's
reading that
i want to engulf him i want to exert
power over him
make him uncomfortable so he's reading
it and as he's reading it
i'm seeing his adam's apple trembling i
know now okay
you know what's getting ready to come
because you know what you just did
you're god's law enforcement officer but
now
you just saw that i caught you in a lie
and that's the reason why i wanted him
to read it to himself first i just
didn't want to come out
and catch him i wanted him to understand
what was getting ready to happen
so so let me explain just just to say it
like this right
when a person i i know you you've
probably heard this before
and i know other people has probably
experienced it you have people that when
they get
afraid they pee themselves they're
they're they they lose control of some
of their movements
either urine some of us bowel and the
reason why that happens
is because they sit in fear too long
when something happens quickly the way
your body reacts to fear is different
but when fear when you're engulfed in
fear too long
your nervous system begins to tie up on
you
and so the reason why i wanted him to
read it is because i wanted to engulf
him
in fear for a period of time to continue
to weaken him so he's reading it his
adam's apple starts trembling
and he's reading it too long it's only a
paragraph i had to stop him and say are
you finished you're done
he says yes so i said
do you recognize your name on that
document
his voice is trembling when he says yes
i said okay this is what i want you to
do
i want you to read that paragraph
for the record out loud he reads it
and he's trembling as he's reading it
and when he finishes he says
to to all the detectives listed below
please read all
the files in state versus isaac wright
pass it down to the detective below you
make sure you sign it and date it
that's what it said so after you read it
out loud i says
you just said your name was on it did
you sign that document
yes mr wright i signed it and you dated
it didn't you yes i did
and before he could say anything else i
snatched the document out of his hand
and walked away from him towards my
table
by the time i got midway to the table i
turned around and i called him a liar so
you lied today you're a liar aren't you
i mind you this is a detective of honor
and as i said to him
as i call him a liar and he's explaining
himself no mr wright i didn't i said yes
you did because
if you didn't lie today you lied to the
prosecutor and as i'm talking to him
i'm taking my files out my case files
now i'm going to save him he's in
trouble so what i'm going to do now
is i'm going to save him and as he's
trying to explain
i slayed my file in right in front of
him
and i say redeem yourself tell the court
what really happened
and i walked away from him while i was
walking away i heard this
scream i've been holding us in for seven
and a half
years and he started telling everything
it was that the the hearings lasted a
little bit longer but
but after he finished i knew at that
point
it was over it was and it was
it was a snowball rolling down the hill
every everything came tumbling down
that confession was a prelude to the
entire case falling apart
the prosecutor running the jo i mean it
was it was it was just
it was done
it's such an incredible story man your
your fortitude your resilience your
willingness to
self-educate to stand up for yourself to
fight an
overwhelming odd and to
never lose sight of where you're trying
to end up and what you have to do to get
there
is one of the most breathtaking and
inspiring stories i've ever heard dude
like this is
just absolutely mind-blowingly amazing
and it's extraordinary to see that
you've
not only become a lawyer but you've
become one of the most sought-after
lawyers
in america not only do you have an
incredible life story but it's been
turned into an incredible tv show
called for life on abc um you know not
only that but you're
really trying to be a servant and bring
your just deep wisdom in the way that
you look at problem solving to
a lot of people man it's it is really
breathtaking
um where can people follow along on your
journey
um i mean they can follow from a social
media aspect you know it's it's uh
isaac wright jr uh at isaac wright jr
um that's my that's my personal uh
social media handle and you know
everything's there i lay out my life on
social media to things i'm doing on a
daily basis
some of the things that i've gone
through some of the things that's going
to happen and
you have my campaign website
which is www.writefornyc2021
you can sign up there you can join you
can you know you can donate you can
follow the campaign
um uh and you can you know ask
questions uh there's a there's another
site and i think this site is
significant but it's it's
specifically for people in new york
called for dividendforgiveness.nyc
it's dealing with a policy issue that i
have uh to forgive as mayor when i
become mayor i'm going to
be forgiving uh those uh
those people that are renters that are
facing um
eviction and those that are facing
foreclosure because of covid
um i'm looking to put them in
in forgiveness programs where all those
debts are going to be forgiven
they start with their landlords and
their mortgage companies anew and we
make the landlords and
and the mortgage companies uh whole so
that they don't take losses
uh i think that's going to keep
thousands and thousands of people
um off the off from off the street uh
it's going to keep thousands
and thousands and thousands of people in
their home uh it's going to give them
some comfort and some security
and allow them to move forward in life
without the anxiety
of what's going to happen to them and
their family tomorrow and so that's
forgiveness.nyc
they can start signing up now in
preparations for me
uh taking this office of mayor and
giving it back to the people
uh and getting new york city back uh you
know back on its feet
i love it guys trust me the more time
you spend with isaac the more it will
melt your brain in terms of what is
possible what all of us can do if we
take control of our own lives
if instead of getting angry or bitter we
turn that into action we figure out how
the game works and then we just play it
better than anybody else i mean it
really
is such an extraordinary tale and
speaking of things that are
extraordinary
if you haven't already be sure to
subscribe and until next time my friends
be legendary take care each and every
day i'm looking at
at the blessings that have that that
have come now look there's no way in
hell i would have signed up for this
right
like i there's like not at all like it
wasn't it wasn't
it wasn't definitely no i wouldn't have
gave up you know like
all of my 20s essentially you know for
for this
not at all